[Music]
everybody
welcome to another episode of
conversations with tom i'm here with
jamie metzel
jamie i am super excited to talk to you
about your book hacking darwin
as i said i was completely captivated by
that book and what's possible with the
human genome
and all that good stuff so man welcome
to the show thanks tom really happy to
be here
cool well give the listeners a just
super quick thumbnail sketch of what
hacking darwin
is about and because this is as opposed
to some of the science fiction stuff
you've done this is all science fact
so what was it that made you want to
write this book
so first question the book i mean if
there's just a
takeaway for people our ancestors they
thought biology was just something that
happens
you get born somehow now
suddenly our one little group of monkeys
who climbed down from the trees
suddenly we have this ability to read
write and hack the code of life like
these
superpowers that we've imagined are
god's having to create life to
change life to extend life suddenly
we have it and it's going to
fundamentally transform
so many aspects of our lives not just
healthcare
but the the way we make babies the
nature of the babies that we make and
ultimately
our evolutionary trajectory is a species
and that really scares people because
people say
like well wait a second i'm a homo
sapien i like being a homo sapien but
when you kind of
imagine the whole range
the the the temporal range of human
evolution
we've only been this for about 300 000
years which is kind of nothing so it was
never this was never the end point of
our evolution
um but i think for a long long time
people haven't imagined that we were
going to be
the drivers of our evolutionary process
on a
on a biological level and that that's
kind of the essence of the moment i mean
hacking darwin
tells this whole story from beginning to
you know there's no end but uh into into
the future but
but that's essentially what the core
message of hacking darwin
one thing that i found really
interesting about the book is you talk
about
if we were to reach back into our past a
thousand years and bring
either an embryo or an infant and then
raise them in the modern world
we would they'd be indistinguishable
from you know who we are today but if we
were to reach a thousand years into the
future and bring that person back
they would essentially be superhuman
compared to what we have now
and i want to stress again for people
that are listening to this what we're
about to go into at least this part we
may talk about science fiction as well
but
this is science fact this [__] that is
happening right now
um what what is it do you think in terms
of the person a thousand years in the
future even just sort of extrapolating
on
technology that's real and being used
today what would be
superhuman about them so lots of
of different things and i think it's
it's really hard for people to get their
mind around this
at this point which i write about in the
book if you were to go back and kidnap
some kid from a thousand years ago and
just
put them into our lives like we would
have no way of
i mean they would just be exactly like
us in
pretty much every way but that kid in a
thousand years
into the future is going to live longer
healthier
more robust life they probably weren't
born by their parents fornicating um
they were
probably born because uh through through
a process in a lab
um almost certainly they were the result
of their embryo being selected
from among thousands i mean in which
right now there is a process of
of selection in the sense that that when
a man's
sperm i mean there's lots of sperm cells
more than a billion
in some cases you know goes into a woman
and then they kind of
swim around and they then they find the
right egg that there's a form of
selection that's happening there
but what what these kids a thousand
years from now we're going to be
born from is a a selection that we are
managing we're going to be sequencing
the egg and sperm we're going to be
sequencing probably many thousands of
embryos we're going to be selecting
which one
and and when you think about
embryo selection how did a wild chicken
laying one egg a month become a domestic
chicken ling one egg a day
our ancestors did it not knowing
anything about genetics
but if we have all of these generations
between now and a
thousand years from now where we are
making informed they may not be wise but
informed
selections about who about which embryos
get implanted in
the mother we can really push a lot of
evolutionary
change and then we're going to go in and
we're going to make
um edits to our genomes and i don't
think
even a thousand years from now we're
going to be making people from scratch
but we are going to be moving around a
lot of of the genetics
to in order to either prevent bad
outcomes
or increase the likelihood of things
that we consider to be good
all right so i think it'll be
interesting to go in and tease out some
of the
phrases that you've said and really talk
about what that is so we've got a
chicken
it's laying one egg a month and over
time we're going to turn that into a
chicken that's laying
um one egg a day basically what they're
doing is a the
they're looking for the one that lays
two eggs a month and then they're trying
to breed it
with another one and then when that one
creates one that's like two and a half
eggs a month
you breed that one with one that's doing
a little bit more and now all of a
sudden over generations you
get that it becomes very common for them
to do one a day same with dogs right it
starts with a wolf that's just a little
more friendly than the next
and then flash forward and i have a
pomeranian that you know wants to sit on
my lap
so you selective breeding i think is the
term for that so you're just basically
picking traits that you want
and then it has sort of a knock-on
effect of other traits like the fluffier
tail
the floppy ears um they weren't
necessarily breeding for that they were
breeding for temperament but you get
this sort of knock-on effect
now when we talk about that that's
exactly and i think that that people
kind of get that that you know our dog
that
they used to be like a wolf and now
they've
they've turned into into dogs but people
have a hard time
internalizing is that we used to be
little single cell organisms i mean and
i think that
there's there's so much there's so much
movement
so much possibility in all of biology
because almost four billion years ago
there was just
one single cell organism and that grew
into all of life
and so from this starting point of where
we are now
there's an unlimited number of possible
futures even if we didn't have any of
this biology just because
that's how biology works things morph
there's this constant
it's almost like a war of random
mutation and natural selection
where every new generation of every
species is a little bit different
from their parents and sometimes it's
better and sometimes it's worse
and over time huge changes happen
and now we are are amplifying and
magnifying that process yeah that
that is the the whole notion of the
blind watchmaker right that we've ended
up the way that we've ended up through
um i mean if you believe in evolution
which i certainly do that
there wasn't like some desired outcome
that was trying to be reached it's
your environment changes dramatically
sometimes completely without warning
what was working in a previous
generation
and the fittest of that generation now
be maybe the least likely to survive and
you know whatever
adaptation has changed and the fact that
we went from oxygen being a poison to
now being the very thing that we all
need to survive
and just the the way that things change
like that what becomes so interesting
though
is when you inject human consciousness
into it and it's now no longer a blind
watchmaker it is someone with a high
degree of intention
that is deciding through embryo
selection
where we're going to go and that that
was the thing that really is so
interesting in hacking darwin is you
keep telling these things like little
stories like
oh imagine that you go into this you
know future
near future by the way and they're just
asking you hey so instead of you know
implanting whatever it is now for ivf
like
eight or nine or 15 embryos it's a
thousand
and we're able to screen them for um
high probability of certain outcomes
whether that's height
whether that's beauty whether that's
intelligence and now it's like
do you want to know what this embryo has
a chance of being
and if so which of these do you want
and then you see how this really starts
to become an issue
what are what are some of the like when
we talk about playing god what are some
of the
key things that you think people will
start selecting from
when we're just beginning to dip our toe
that are sort of that the
non-controversial ones
yeah yeah so a lot of people ask about
about playing god and what
what i always say is whatever your
theology
if you think that there's this god
all-powerful god who's making all kinds
of decisions
about how we live and that god is
deciding yeah i think this little kid
should have some deadly
genetic disorder and this little kid
should get run over
it's kind of a sadistic god and so
if you believe as i do that that we are
just one species among all these other
species
and that we have just like a lion or a
zebra
or whatever is trying to think well how
do i maximize my
chance of survival and well-being
that's why we have medicine and health
care that's why
when a kid is born with a single gene
mutation
disorder some terrible deadly disease we
don't say oh that's god
i mean some people do but we don't say
oh that's god's will we stay
to hell without let's fix it and that's
and now that we
have more and more of the power to make
those kinds of changes so the
early the early manifestations
tend to be simpler because we know
there's a whole category of these
what's called single gene mutation
disorders or mendelian disorders after
after gregor mendel and that's where
you have one gene one problem with a
single mutation it's one letter that's
out of place
but if you have that if you have that
disruption or whatever it is then you
have one of these disorders like
sickle cell disease or tay sachs or or
whatever
and so it's a clearer case we can just
fix this one thing
and then a kid who was gonna die when
they were five
all of a sudden has the opportunity to
live to 90.
um but but life isn't in the old days
people used to
think oh there's a gene for that a tall
g and a short gene but life
we're we're really complicated we have
our genetics we have our
broader systems biology i'm sure your
listeners have heard of the of the
epigenome and the metabolome and the
proteome and all these
ohms that are that are part of of who we
are
and so we're going to need more and more
knowledge and more and more
sophistication
to make smart decisions in this world of
complexity
um but we're going to get it and the
reason we're going to get it is because
the complexity of our biology has
remained relatively constant for
millions of years
but the sophistication of our tools is
increasing at an exponential
rate and just one example in 2012
jennifer doudna at berkeley and and
others
they developed this system for
uh crispr genome editing i think many
people have heard of crispr now
um six years later
2018 the world's first crispr babies
were born
so that it took six years to go from
just
something in a in a lab saying hey this
may be an interesting
way to edit the genome of a bacteria
or the genome of a single cell
organism or some kind of simple organism
six years later the first
human genome edited babies are born so
when you kind of take that
for people that are flipping out right
now are we talking about the twins in
china
where they did the edit for hiv
resistance yeah
that's pretty controversial though right
it's not like people are like hey
no go for it go for the prospect i think
it's terrible i think that ho john quay
who's the
the doctor who did it i mean now we can
talk about
later now it's like we've had 57 crises
since then so people are thinking about
it less
but i think it was highly irresponsible
i mean there was this technology
was being used in plants and animals
and so the first step with humans needed
to be done very
very carefully and what he and others
working with him were trying to do is
just to race
forward to try to you know claim some
kind of of glory uh and it was
it was a very dangerous having said that
and and i don't think it was
uh you know we don't know fully but it
looks like it wasn't even
successful um in conferring um any kind
of additional
hiv resistance um but
had he not done it um
still you know some years after five
years
no definitely not more than 10 somebody
else would have done it
they i'm sure they would have done it or
hope they would have done it in a more
responsible way with it with a better
target
yeah i was going to ask what is a
responsible way when we start talking
about
going in and and i think it bears saying
for anybody that's new to this
so basically they're using bacteria
which have an ability to
ward off viruses by recognizing a piece
of the viral
code so the the what atc
oh god like whatever the the letters of
life are
yeah they they recognize a repeating
pattern in that and they go i've seen
you before and so they've developed the
ability to go and cut that
and it basically unravels the virus and
the virus is done so now once you have
the ability to go in and cut
a dna sequence you could go into a human
dna sequence a plant dna sequence
whatever
and you can humans can actually program
the bacteria and say go look for this
sequence which could be
uh in this case the susceptibility to
hiv maybe they were wrong but that was
anyway what they were looking for
go and cut that out replace it with
something else which you can also tell
it to do which is
insane and now you have the ability to
actually genetically modify a human now
you can
get into like germline you can you can
modify
anything and and so what you've
described is kind of the traditional
crispr
but now there are new things base
editing
other ways where you go and what's that
base editing it's instead of cutting
you just change the letters because when
you cut it's kind of
aggressive how do you do that it's it's
these are all chemical reactions so you
have the same thing you have the guide
rna
telling you where to go but instead
of doing a cut you basically replace
one genetic letter with with another and
the the key point
is this stuff it's getting better it's
getting faster it's getting more
accurate
every day and and and that's why
you talked in the beginning about about
science versus science fiction
um life is is at the boundary
between those those two things because
real science that's happening now
feels like science fiction because we
are so we were all
by definition wedded to the reality
around us
and we have brains that are are have
developed for practical thinking in the
sense that
if you're kind of a crazy thinker on the
in the african
savannah you probably are the guy who
got eaten first
because the the practical guy he said
like oh you know i think i heard a
russell in the
in the in the in the weeds over there
i'm running and
the dreamer is kind of like looking up
and imagining
you know flying spaceships um so we have
these very practical
brains by design and we have these
technologies that are advancing
exponentially and it's we really we have
to kind of
force ourselves to think
like science fiction in order to
really fathom the implications of the
science fact
yeah that that's one thing you make a
good call for in the book which is hey
i'm writing this because we
we need to be talking about this which
by the way i d humans won't humans will
not wake up to this until
um there is a problem until people start
getting genetically modified and then
there's going like the first time you
have a debate uh
as to whether or not a chinese athlete
should be allowed in the olympics who's
you know got
three times the muscle density of any
other human being
uh because they manipulated oh god what
are the double muscled cows uh i'm
forgetting that
but this like myostatin yes like there's
a real gene that says
stop basically producing muscle because
muscle is actually dangerous when you
think about a famine or something like
that because muscles take up so many
calories
so the body actually has to stop
developing muscle
so when you have that myostatin
inhibition where it doesn't kick in and
tell you
you get these like you can see pictures
of cows that just like look like they
live in the [__] gym it is hilarious
so when somebody starts making that that
edit and we see them roll up to the
olympics
now people are going to panic that's
like in fact the um back in the 70s when
we had the first test tube baby that was
when people really started to go oh
i guess this is really going to be an
issue i think it's it's super hard to
wake
people up it is well the standard keeps
changing yeah just in the sense that you
know
most of us many most any athlete today
could beat most any athlete from 100
years ago
uh we're all almost all of us are
immunized which is
this incredible superpower that our
ancestors
didn't have and you talk about louise
brown the first uh
the uh the first quote-unquote test dude
test tube baby ivf
it's always shocking in the beginning
and then it's like oh that's the way we
do things and you know right now i mean
we we have
this whole sport called weightlifting or
bodybuilding
no one of those people could look like
that if they were just living the life
of
our of our ancestors and eating plants
and the occasional
zebra or uh or whatever so i think that
there are these
these shock moments of like well that's
not
normal and then the idea of what's
normal
shifts and that and so i think you're
absolutely right
um we are going to have genetically
modified athletes
and and we're going to want genetically
modified athletes and as a matter of
fact if we
did a full genetic analysis of everybody
who's won the olympics in any kind of
extreme
focused sport like sprinting or marathon
running or
or whatever my guess is everybody
is some kind of genetic outlier we just
haven't been able to
look under the hood and i think it's
going to be a question for us
what is natural when the whole concept
of natural
is is constantly moving and changing
that's interesting and then what humans
um
say they want versus what they end up
sort of voting for with their wallets
so there was a really interesting
movement in bodybuilding probably got in
the 70s
where you had this whole like steroids
were really coming on the scene
bodybuilders were getting
much bigger way smaller than they are
today because steroids are
crazy effective and like we're selecting
and pushing it farther than ever but in
the 70s
there was this real moment of like hey
should we make this natural or should we
go
the drug route and so there was a whole
natural bodybuilding
organization and it just ended up
getting its ass handed to it
by the people that were on drugs now
obviously they don't
champion the fact that they're on drugs
and and back then certainly most of them
would claim no no what do you mean i'm
not doing drugs
but it's just seeing them get that big
seeing them be
that sort of peak shifted from what you
see walking down the street is so
interesting and and it draws people in
that that ends up being the one that
gets the eyeballs and the most attention
so when you first said like we'll want
enhanced athletes i was like what why
would we want them but
putting it in that context of like hey
if you've got somebody who can dunk a
basketball on a 20-foot hoop
is that more interesting i mean i think
it's a great
example matter of fact i started to
write about uh about that in
hacking darwin and i got these pictures
of these guys who were like the
world natural weightlifting or
bodybuilding champion and then they were
kind of all these puny guys and you
couldn't find
one example of somebody who was in the
kind of
natural bodybuilding who looked anything
like
anybody who was in the the world
bodybuilding champion and you're right
if if we said oh we're going we're going
to handicap
everything and and we only want these
kind of quote-unquote
naturals nobody wants that no people
what are what are people watching
football here in the united states i
mean they want
bigger people they want faster people
i mean this is a it's a that's what's
kind of interesting to us
is well what are the limits of what it
means
to be a human being and certainly there
are rules in sports and whatever those
rules are i mean they're kind of random
but that's what
makes a makes a sport you can say well
it's cheating if you do something that's
not in in the rules
but there will be other people who will
say well let's make a
you know let's make an olympics for
people
who are enhanced and how many people are
going to watch
that enhanced olympics i mean
some of them some of them will and again
i'm not saying this is good or bad
because
the answer is it's probably both um but
i think there are a lot of people say
well i know what it means to be natural
i know what it means to be a human and
that's the line and we can't
cross that line but how we define that
is
very very different from from how our
ancestors
defined i mean i live in an apartment in
new york my ancestors were a bunch of
nomads
in the african safari if i said oh yeah
it's going to be it's like a thing it's
a building you have to
take the elevator or go up the stairs
and there's air conditioning and
you know you don't have to hunt you just
kind of open the
the refrigerator and there's stuff there
like that would seem
insane and everything always seems
unsane and yet in saying it we kind of
keep
moving and then that's why for me the
question
the ultimate question is ethics the only
question is what are we comfortable with
and collectively and how do we make sure
that for something that's this sensitive
we're moving forward
in a thoughtful way together
rather than having a bunch of that's why
i'm a critic of of hujunkui and chai in
china
rather than having just a bunch of
people making individual decisions
because the implications
of those individuals decisions are
societal
i don't think we ever got to the answer
of what would be
the right way to go about beginning to
practice this on humans what does that
look like is it just
in fact do you have a line is it disease
removal purely
is there something else like how do we
do it well yeah so
there's no natural line because a lot of
when i talk to people what people feel
like they want is well
on four therapeutic applications to
treat diseases
and i'm against enhancement i think most
people
kind of feel that they that they want
that but when you push
them of like well where does therapy end
and enhancement
begins like if your child is going to be
born
and they're going to be one foot tall
like and you have an
intervention that can make them six feet
tall
would you make that intervention i think
most people would say well geez one foot
tall
like that's going to be really hard to
uh hard to
to live although somebody could like put
you in their purse and carry them around
carry you around
um and but then if you they say well i
definitely want that and then you say
all right
how about two feet and they say yeah
well two feet is still too short
and at some point you kind of get to
five feet and they say well you know
five feet that's within the realm of
normal lots of people who are five feet
tall
and you use there's no natural line
between those things but for your
question i'm part of the world health
organization
international advisory committee on
human genome editing
and that's what we're trying to do is at
least to lay out
what could be just some basic
guidelines and and parameters and i
think the the core
the two core principles one needs to be
cost benefit analysis
to to change the foundations of what it
means to be a
human it's actually a really big deal
it's actually really serious
we don't know enough about the fully how
the human body
works to feel that that any change is is
costless i mean anything that we do
there there's an upside perhaps and then
there's a potential downside and
sometimes
we don't know what those things are so
we just
we need to be thoughtful about cost
benefit analysis
and we need to be making sure that we're
keeping society
together because when when we start
when people start talking about changing
their genetics it's not just them
especially
you started to mention heritable or
germline manipulations
if i have a germline
manipulation and i have a child with
somebody
then my children will also
gain that that change and that
and they might those kids will go out
and live their life and they may have
kids with with somebody else so
everybody else is a stakeholder in my
decisions
when we're talking about these kinds of
systemic change i think they should be
and i think that
that's why we need to have these broader
and inclusive conversations about
the way let me ask why why do you think
that it matters so much is it purely
the psychological component because
let's say that you were
if you introduced a um essentially
you're introducing a mutation it's very
intentional but you're introducing a
mutation
that mutation is either going to work or
it's not going to work if it doesn't
work it's going to die out and if it
does work
then would not society depending on what
it is obviously would not society
benefit from that and look
i i am well i am asking a sort of
devil's advocate rhetorical question
i am well aware of the implications of
eugenics and all that terrifying [__]
but i what i'm trying to understand is
are we
because i'm basically gonna whatever our
big fear is i'm gonna say okay if we
remove that
then like where does the discussion open
up
so is it the the
sort of moral implications of
we shouldn't play god is it the societal
implications like you're talking about
where it's like look we've got
seven plus billion people like it's
shitty to make them obsolete versions
basically and you're introducing
something so much better like that's
sort of brutal in its own right is it
the suffering of that one
person that if you get it wrong like
[__] like you could be messing them up
in ways
you don't even know until they're like
35 and then their face starts to melt
you know it's like you you just don't
know like where
where are the big like when you guys sit
down in your think tank room
what are you putting your finger on if
like this is where we can't go here for
this reason
yeah so personally for me uh definitely
playing god has nothing to do with it
because i i write about this in the book
if if you believe in that kind of god
then why isn't
god playing god like why isn't god
preventing all these all these kinds of
bad outcomes for me and it's not
inherently um morally wrong
as a matter of fact i could easily paint
a scenario where it would be morally
wrong
not to intervene if you had some let's
say you had one embryo and if that
embryo was implanted it's the only one
you have your only chance to have a
child
and if that embryo was implanted uh that
embryo
would uh that when it became a child
would die
very young of some terrible single gene
mutation
disorder and it's not treatable and i
i could easily make an argument that it
would be immoral
not to intervene not to genetically
engineer
that pre-implanted embryo to make that
one change
so that that kid could could live a a
long life and so i
i definitely think on a moral front we
have to be having these
conversations and that certainly was
very under the vatican
published a piece of mine that's that's
on my in my website
um on exactly these issues and i raised
some
really challenging issues for for them
in
how we should think about these these
moral issues
for me the issue is societal um because
we're not going to
first we're not going to know whether
any changes
that we make are good or bad certainly
if you're saving a
kid from from death that's that's good
but for these other kinds of changes it
may take a long time and our biology is
extremely complex
and so i just feel like if somebody is
changing a system
and we're all part of that system it's
not because if
if if it was inheritable it was just
somebody doing something to themselves
you could say all right well you know
you you tried the kind of you know three
eyes thing or whatever and
and maybe it worked for you maybe it
didn't work for you
but when they're changing we're all part
of this connected thing of of humanity
and
i'm not saying don't change it i'm just
saying that changing it
should at least partly be a collective
decision
it's primarily an individual decision um
but because individual changes when
they're heritable will affect everybody
else we need to have
some kind of of process and i think
there's a
you know this is life and and it's
normal in our societies that
issues that touch life are regulated and
we
you know we have debates on things like
abortion
versus versus choice
um but at the end of the day i think we
recognize that life
is really sensitive and we need to have
some kind of
guard rails beyond just human
self-experimentation and we need to make
sure that the science is good
okay so now let's say i get it you have
been so clear and consistent on your
messaging this
everyone should have a seat at the table
everybody should be voting on this now
i'm just saying let's say that we had a
representative democracy here
and we all elect you and we want you
because you know can i say um thank you
this was a wise choice i promise i will
leave
wisely in your interest this is all
about you it's not about me
amazing i love that so what what
rules do you put in place and let's make
them twofold one self
so are there limitations to what i can
do myself
and then on the germ line where this is
now going to affect everybody
what sort of you know we don't have to
get down to like sub point
you know 14 on a big contra actual thing
but just sort of
broad strokes what limitations if any
would you put on the self and what
limitations if any would you put on
germline yeah
so i definitely would have more latitude
for people doing things to themselves
um but not complete latitude i mean
right now it's it's illegal to commit
suicide and it's hard to argue but do
you think that's smart
you know i i think it's it's hard to
inform i think we should stigmatize
um suicide but should we make it illegal
well
i'm going to pause and and reflect i
don't think it should necessarily be
illegal um because certainly i support
euthanasia
um but i also feel that
we should make sure that
it's discouraged other than in some
pretty
terrible and and extreme cases uh
because there are cultures
um that that actually um
are much more accepting of suicide some
asian cultures uh
for example and traditionally japan and
i don't think it's
i don't think that's healthy so i i
think it's good
to have bad things stigmatized whether
making them illegal is the right way to
do it i don't know and again as as i
said i support
i support you euthanasia in extreme
cases
but again in a regulated environment
where it's because otherwise things can
really get uh get out of hand but
coming back to your question about so
for in terms of individual
latitude i think individuals should have
some latitude but i also think that
society
has a responsibility to protect
individuals health like if i go to the
drug store and run themselves
from yeah well like for example that's
why if i go to the drug store
and buy some kind of product or or a
drug
i want the government to regulate
whether it's safe for me to take that
thing into my body if i go to a doctor
and the doctor is doing some kind of
procedure
on me i want the government to say well
this is a safe procedure
or this procedure is within the bounds
of normalcy
because otherwise you go there and then
somebody would say well i you know i
cut off your arm like whatever the the
thing is
we need that and i don't imagine that
every individual has perfect knowledge
and so if if everybody had perfect
knowledge of all the risks
and all the ben and um and all of the
benefits
of any kind of intervention you'd say
well geez you you go to the drug store
or you go to the doctor here's this
range of stuff
you're getting your your arms and legs
cut off because you have a headache
it seems like a bad idea but if you want
to do it go for it
we don't want to live in that kind of of
society so i think there's all right
let me pin you down so you've got uh in
food anyway it's called
grass generally recognized as safe so
if if an ingredient is generally
recognized as safe then you can put it
in your food without having to seek any
further
approval or anything but if you're
putting something that's outside that
list then you may have to seek approval
um would you be in favor if there was a
a grass list of edits where it was like
we've tried these out we went through
whatever
approval process we had to go through
we've gone through that
is there anything that you would
intrinsically say this is only for self
i would not want them doing you can't
add a third arm no
third leg um no increasing your
intelligence like is there anything that
as
long as it was safe is there anything
you would not want the self to do
so i'll flip it a little bit so let's
start with the things that i would be
comfortable with
so like the whole range of of deadly
single gene mutation
disorders once it's proven that these
interventions could be happening and
they're safe which
and we're not there yet again which is
was
why i'm so critical of who john kuei the
chinese scientist but
i think we will be i think we will be
relatively soon
i think it's that we're going to think
about like a range of interventions
whether it's at the pre-implanted embryo
stage whether it's the embryo stage
newborn stage whatever and they'll be
in a certain time where it'll make most
sense
to to intervene in mo in most cases
to prevent something bad and that will
i'm certain of it
that will become a norm and there will
be
a growing list of acceptable
interventions that over time we know
either or say are safe
or that the the risk is outweighed
by what we know about the potential
benefits but as
i write about in the book that list is
going to grow
and it's going to grow over time and
it's going to move beyond
what we think about as therapeutic
interventions
into new areas that now we think of
as enhancements and i'm not necessarily
inherently against anything
but i just think that it will make most
sense
for some kind of intervention to get on
the
this is safe we know what we're doing
list
before people start doing
experimentation or
self-experimentation and again as i said
and the government
has an interest in protecting us from
those
things and i listened to a lot of these
different podcasts
and i was on joe rogan and and i it's i
love that podcast
but there's some stuff that people say
it's like oh yeah of course
x is true and i'm listening it's like
well wait a second
x isn't true and and when we're talking
about
systemic life-changing
interventions we just we just need to be
careful biology
is really complicated stuff we don't
we don't really understand human biology
if we think of
of all of human biology as like if you
understood it completely
that would be a hundred percent and if
you knew nothing it would be zero
percent maybe we're at four percent
maybe five percent we don't know fifty
percent of how our our
our bodies work so i think we need to be
conservative
but i don't i don't i don't see any
inherent barrier over time i mean if
somebody
is trying to do genetically engineer
their kids now for
an enhanced intelligence it's just not
going to going to work
but only because we don't know how to do
it right correct
intelligence is just so complicated it's
the interplay of so many different genes
that we haven't identified yet part of
what i'm i'm trying to walk through and
i find this so [__] interesting
is i i want to get to um i want to
remove some of what i'll call the more
mundane like you and i aren't actually
making policy right now
you may be in in the you know outside of
this podcast but at least in the
confines of you know our time together
we're not actually making policy
so i'm trying to figure out like where
where the pain points are for you so
here's here's how i see it so one i i
watched somebody
um in the last couple days of their life
and they were [__] suffering
at a level i was just like this is so
crazy and he
he really was hell-bent to
live up to this idea of like i'll never
give up and i thought
wow that's so impressive and it was like
i was moved by it
and i i have built my reputation on like
you know never say die like keep going
and as i was watching him i was like
this doesn't make sense
he should absolutely my advice to you
dear friend that's going through this
is 100 euthanasia like there's this is a
one-way street there's no coming back
from this it is clear that you're within
hours or days
of passing away you are so uncomfortable
now it should be his decision
a hundred percent but i know at one
point he had looked at it he was going
to have to move states and all that and
so it was just like this real
complicated mess
and i just thought euthanasia 100 should
be legal now like you
i i consider it such a dangerous tool to
employ
quickly that it scares the [__] out of
me but do i think that
it should be illegal no i do not because
i just think it's so complicated
now the now when i extend that to my
thinkings about
one's ability to begin to modify
yourself i think you're a
[__] idiot if you start playing with
your jeans
unless that [__] has been tried by a lot
of people before you
but my fascination or my hope is that
enough people do want to be early
adopters that the government has gone
through
with a hunt definitely not letting this
be the wild west
but going in just like they do with food
and i think they make a lot of bad
decisions in food
but it's better than no decisions being
made that they come up with a generally
recognized
as safe editing list and that people
then
get to decide what they want to try and
that over time we'll get a see
like hey what works i will not be an
early adopter
but i will certainly be paying attention
for things like if i could beef up my
intelligence
i would do it 100 if i could beef up my
ability even to read faster
i would do it 100 now of course i'm
gonna just like staying in good health i
would rather
do it through diet and exercise than i
would through taking a supplement
i like knowing that supplements are
there so that if i'm unable to
get to you know whatever point i want
that i can lean on that or even plastic
surgery i've not done it
but i reserve the right to so i'm glad
that it's not illegal so i definitely
fall under
love regulation think that's so
important to keep people because they're
not going to be educated
to make sure that they're not getting
themselves in trouble but i like the
idea of like
pushing the boundary of what we can
recognize as being safe
further and further out on the flip side
of that
now you've got germline editing that one
taps into something for me which is far
more
terrifying which is
i think that we want to do it i think i
think we should want to do it as a
better way of saying it
but you want to talk about something
that i think the discrepancy between
what i want to be true
and what will be true is so terrifyingly
vast
that if we could
lock that oh god you you really can't
lock it forever
i'm going to read i'm going to and you
wouldn't want to lock it forever
just because i mean the whole point of
evolution
is evolution is buggy when we random
mutation that means that
every offspring of every species is
different from their parents
and sometimes it's better and sometimes
it's worse and if we were just living
totally in nature
then the better stuff and better doesn't
mean inherently better it's just better
suited for the particular environment
in which it it exists that then that
wins over time and that's how
and that's how species evolve but for us
who kind of are
wedded to being this thing that means
that every generation you have some good
stuff and you have some bad stuff and
sometimes the bad stuff is so bad that
it can kill you
and sometimes we call it cancers and and
other things so i don't think that we
should
rule out any kind of of intervention
just because of the nature of that
intervention
it's just that we need to be really
careful and thoughtful about
the cost-benefit analysis and the
context in which we do something
and so i i just think i think it'd be a
terrible mistake to say
never germline i mean i i've had this
debate with the
catholic church um and and but that
doesn't mean that the alternative to
that is
always germline or do whatever you want
i i want to drop this into the messy
reality by quoting
um you well probably your publisher
but this was something written in the
description of genesis code one of your
science fiction books
it says in 2023 america bankrupt
violently divided by the culture wars
and beholden to archrival china
the rules of the game are complicated
and i thought
first of all when did you write that
yeah what year
i'm so proud of that i wrote it oh god
um in two
i have to remember like 2 000 and
uh i don't know seven or 2008 the fact
that you put your finger on the culture
war
is crazy i want to be
audited i want somebody to go through
everything i've written everything that
i've said
and and tell me which i kind of
know like how accurate it was because in
this
i mean in in genesis code i mean that's
what's happening our culture is divided
they're all these
culture wars we're ripping each other
ripping each other
apart and then there are all of these
these new technologies which are kind of
which are amplifying these divisions and
creating
new opportunities for people to do
things differently
so when i think about like the tragedy
of the commons and the fact that you
know
hey i'm looking at this whale in the
water and i think it adds more value to
my life to be in the water and to be
free
and you know how beautiful that is but
then somebody else is like [__] that
like i'm gonna harpoon this thing and
take it in and sell it for the oil
and you realize well man then i'm here
like do it it is going to get whaled so
do i be the one to whale it
it's like we we have seen that play out
so many times
and it's so devastating obviously not
taking us anywhere spectacularly
wonderful
and yet it is the reality that we face
and the fact that china has already
done um gene editing on living humans
you can see like
we may not want it to be true but the
fact is that people are playing with
this
and if we get and look it's not today so
everybody who's
who's dismissing this by saying why the
[__] are they even talking about this
like
this is potentially decades out it's
going to happen if you give us any like
there's a great
um elon musk quote where he's saying
about virtual reality if you give
any rate of improvement you don't have
to buy into moore's law it could take
ten thousand years but th
this is going to end up being a debate
that has to happen same is true
in because because the big question mark
in gene editing is
we don't know what genes actually do
what when you take them
in concert but as you say in the book
hacking darwin we are not infinitely
complex we're just
incredibly complex and as long as there
is a finite nature to the level of
complexity ultimately our ability to
process that data with computers or
whatever
is going to reach the point where we
will be able to say
this embryo equals this this is your
einstein embryo
this is your rain man embryo and like
you get a pig
and so cool i'm gonna take my einstein
embryo okay
now if we're playing that game and i
know that either very rapidly through
gene editing or
more slowly by just embryo selection
a nation state can take itself like you
can imagine when this is
like the chicken that lays one egg a
month becomes a chicken that lakes an
egg
every day what happens when it's
einstein and then you take einstein's
einstein baby and then you take
einstein's einsteins einstein baby
and like all of a sudden it's you know
you've got iqs of 300 or 500 or a
thousand
and compared to somebody who refuses to
play those games
i don't want to go up against somebody
with an iq of a thousand with my you
know buck 15 or whatever
that i'm hovering at so it's like that
that gets gnarly but what do you do when
it's the culture war is tearing us apart
it's us v china or russia or whoever and
like
they're gonna [__] harpoon the whale
if we don't and now it's like as much as
i was about to say
lock that [__] down i'm like oh man you
can't because i don't want to become
you know i don't want to get taken over
essentially by a nation that does choose
to do that
and so that you put your finger on
exactly the point and that
i'm spending about 90 percent of my
life's energy right now
trying to solve exactly that that uh
that problem
um because if we don't solve this this
global
tragedy of the commons problem where um
we're just going to compete ourselves in
into uh out of existence and that's
for me i mean this i i'm so i'm now i'm
i'm
in earlier i'll give you the quick back
story um earlier in the year
in the very very beginning stages of the
pandemic i was supposed to give a talk
for singularity
university which is like the university
of the future and i'm on faculty there
on whether the tools of the genetics
revolution were a match for the pandemic
and that morning i woke up and said it's
a really important question
but it's not the question the question
is what you just asked is
why is it that we weren't prepared for
this pandemic
and why is it that we can't we weren't
able to prepare for
any pandemic and why is it that we can't
solve
any of these big global problems whether
it's protecting the ocean ecosystems
like you mentioned or
climate change or proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction or the
the big scientific issues
um because we're all competing with each
other and the reason
is is this this same global collective
action problem is that
we are our big problems
are shared and global but the way we're
organized to address them at least
since 1648 and the piece of westphalia
which ended the 30 years war
is predominantly national and so these
these kind of
national forces that you've just
described um
they drove us into two world wars and
then we thought oh [__]
if we don't fix this problem we're going
to keep going
war after war after war and that was why
we created this
thin overlay of international
organizations like the
like the u.n but still we live in this
world of
competing states and the problem is that
our little
species of these these african
nomadic primates suddenly and
very rapidly became a species with the
ability
as as we're talking about now to
fundamentally
change all of life on earth so we're
just this is one little species we now
have this
this power and we don't have an
infrastructure
that allows us to come together to solve
these kinds of
of problems and so that's you know that
that talk went viral then i stayed up
all night i drafted a declaration of
global interdependence
that went viral i called a meeting of
people on my email list i had a 130
people from 25 countries
and together we launched this what's
become one
organization one shared world and one
shared.world now we're a community of
people in 110
countries but the goal is to solve this
global collective collective action
problem because if we just
if it's everyone for themselves and
every country for themselves
our species is now so powerful we're
going to wipe ourselves out
so what what is the sort of key tenant
how do we pull that off
so what we have to do is first we need
to recognize and articulate
our interdependence i mean that's that's
the problem i mentioned i'm an advisor
to who
um this pandemic could have been stopped
in its tracks
if we had just built the world health
organization that we need a whoo that
had its own global surveillance
system that could send investigators
anywhere in the world on a moment's
notice
unlike in the actual situation where
china blocked them for
for almost uh a month where the who
could coordinate a
smart collective uh response
to the pandemic if we had all those
things we wouldn't be in this
in this in this predicament that we're
in we're in now so
what does it look like it looks like
every organization in the world every
business
every civil society group every
government every political party
has to recognize that we have our core
constituencies
the people who we represent whether it's
the citizens of our country
and we have our collective constituency
of our of our species and our
and our planet and that we have to
ultimately
coming back to your thing of killing the
whale or or not
it's the same point as whether we you do
germline edits or not we have to do
a cost benefit analysis but if everybody
is thinking just cost
benefit to me then
we're just gonna we're gonna kill
ourselves and so we we have to
we have to not just change consciousness
but then use that change conscious
changed consciousness to change the
institutions around us
but do you have any sense of how we
actually pull that off like a lot of
when i hear stuff like that i'm like yes
but
humans aren't currently wired that way
and
until because so i think about this a
lot in the context of ai
and people are always worried that you
know the paper clip problem that if you
give
ai the incentive to make paper clips
it'll look at you and be like those
atoms would be way better used as paper
clips
so it doesn't kill you to kill you it
kills you to turn you into the superior
paper
clip and so but the the that desire was
programmed right and minus that desire
um you it's essentially inert
so i started thinking about desires as
sort of being programmed and i think
about humans as sort of wet ai
and through evolution we've got these
imperatives now
i don't maybe somebody's taking the time
to to write them down it'd be super
interesting to see somebody's take on
what our imperatives are
um but we're we're driven certainly at a
really simplistic level
towards pleasure away from pain and
nature has made things like sex
very pleasurable so that you have kids
that have kids um
and things like getting injured very
painful so that you stay along
stay alive long enough so that you can
have kids have kids so
that is at a really basic level
it shows if you want to change the
outcome you have to you have to change
the incentive structure
and so if evolution has given us a set
of um
imperatives like how do you get a
radical change like that without a
dramatic change and imperative yeah and
then maybe that begs nature versus
nurture but
i don't think how do we solve that you
have to go that far because there's no
national imperative in evolution i mean
there's you're you're in california i'm
in i'm in new york isn't there
like we're so tribal wait we're in
trouble but
those tribes used to be you know some
small group of families
that were together and then it was like
oh those [__] you know over there
that
that other tribe but then we we've grown
and so then it became
you know people in your region that were
that was the us and the other thing was
them
and then now it's the people i mean um
you've all know harare talks about this
in your country i mean i haven't met
most people in in the united states i i
feel like we'll work
i mean when we feel that way we're kind
of on the same team
and sometimes we'll have like a world
war ii where everyone will really feel
it and then we'll have
a time like now where people don't feel
it
quite as much but there's nothing
natural there's nothing inherent
about a national identity
let's dive into that because i'm gonna
have a hard time moving past that one so
um i agree that it isn't inherently
national in nature
at all but the national is leveraging
something that already exists which is
us another so
if we know you could change that you
look at like for example these young
kids
in the the global climate change
movement i mean
they've kind of decided well i'm i'm
less
an american and i'm more someone who
wants to change the climate i think that
there's
there but they're just changing the us
and the other so
what i'm saying is you have an us
another problem
and so there's a reason that so many
great science fiction
have you um read the comic book
the graphic novel the watching that's
something i was just it's different than
the movie you know
why i have to i haven't read the comic
book i saw the series which i
loved even though it totally collapsed
in uh in the end but
before that i thought it was great and
then i went back and watched the uh
the movie which i thought sucked um but
the idea that you kind of create the
giant squid to kind of
because i do think that we have this us
and them
but the categories of who is us and who
is
them are really malleable and so
if the us is us our little tribe or us
our country
or whatever them can be the other tribe
or the other country but it could
just as well be with our exact biology
uh
that the us is humanity and the other
are these forces that are that are
trying to
that have the potential to destroy us
and destroy our
our homes that's so abstract i don't
think humans are going to get down with
that like when i really really stop to
think about okay how do you
so impact theory it's whole thing is
like how much can i actually influence
the cultural subconscious so i think a
lot about like
how you get people to group up and
it it does seem true to me that you need
a
very compelling tangible other
to bond people together just like at a
neurochemical level right you're
right that you would be expressing
vasopressin oxytocin that you're bonding
with
these people in a very non-abstract way
like a super concrete way like
how about if you just replace this giant
squid
um with a virus that is
attacking us and killing all of these
all of these
people we just ran that experiment did
it work
but it didn't work and we're dying
because it didn't work and that's
i think that's the big but that's what
i'm saying like i wish it had worked
like that would have been rad
and honestly for a brief second it
looked like it was going to work but
it's still playing out and we don't know
um
whether it will or won't work i mean the
way i i always
say this is year it's kind of like a
1918 year where there's like some
good possible futures we can imagine and
there's some bad possible futures
that we can imagine and the good ones
are are better
but it's but yeah you're right i mean
1945 we were able to
do all these kind of new things because
there was this
devastating war 75 million people died
and then the good guys
won and were able to say hey we're going
to do things a little bit
differently and so it may be that this
crisis
isn't big enough but if there was
ever an a learning opportunity
to say well how do we how do we handle
this and and
i think this is the way we have to come
together because let's say
that we we get a control of this virus
who's to say there's not two years from
now three years from now five years from
now
a synthetic biology a genetically
engineered virus that's 100 times
100 times worse and so i'm not saying
that that we definitely will succeed
but i think that it's it's not pushing
against
our evolution in any kind of
of way that's different from the idea
that a bunch of different people
can all have that same identity as being
part of one country i mean
it may be that we are and us versus them
species but there's a lot of different
ways that those
that those forces and impulses can be
configured
okay so as my elected representative to
make all these decisions
i i have a pitch that i want to make
um and tell me if you think this is
crazy so when i think about okay
the way forward it's messy you've got
countries for right now maybe we can one
day transcend that that would be amazing
um i love the idea of when you draw a
circle to exclude me i'll draw a bigger
circle to include you i think that's
spiritually so rad um but right now
we're in like a super
messy place where it's nations fighting
against each other resources being
limited nah
so you get all the madness that we're
all experiencing right now within that
confine
one thing maybe maybe that we could get
people to get on board with would be
we're going to totally say um gene
editing except for um
mendelian what is it the single
the single like mutation genes those
that are like just horrendous diseases
um that are very easy to edit yes to
that
and unfortunately for now we have to say
no to everything else so even though you
could spare
some human suffering we there's just too
many unknowns so we're not going to play
with that so
yes to mendelian no to everything else
but what we are going to get behind
is a 10 improvement across
let's say 10 variables longevity
intelligence whatever you you're going
to end up telling us what the 10 are
but across 10 things that we agree
globally
um and those are examples of what i mean
we're going to
push for a 10 improvement just
mathematically
and we're going to do it through embryo
selection so
that would require us obviously to beef
up our ability to
assess what genes equal what outcomes
but
then because technology the best
definition of technology i've ever seen
is technology is a hope for a better
future
so you have to give people this belief
that life is going to get better for
their kids and better for their kids and
better for their kids
because that ultimately i think is what
people are really fighting for to be
like
yo i made all these sacrifices so that
my kids would have it better
than i had it i love that impulse thing
it's beautiful even though i don't have
children
so that that to me makes sense and if we
capped it to something manageable so
that no one generation felt like
you know i'm being totally left behind
that it's 10 improvement but over 10
generations like you've got
a doubling yes representative
i love you tom bad idea um
[Laughter]
so here's one so first it's not we we
shouldn't feel that the the single gene
mutation the
mendelian interventions are good and
others are
are bad because some of those
interventions may end up being good
some may end up being bad it really
depends and also for these these more
complex
interventions we don't know what's going
to work what we want we need
is not rules because any rule that we
set
is not going to make sense when when the
messiness
when it faces the messiness of the world
but what we can have are values and
values of
what we believe in uh and and the level
of
certainty of confidence that something
is going to work
to drive a a desired outcome
because it's not just our bodies are
really complex and so let's say we said
we're going to make
ourselves you know 10 percent smarter we
have no idea
what comes with that 10 it could be
madness it could be
all sorts of things and so i think that
for me rather than but if we were making
10 improvement we would have
the chance to pump the brakes if we see
a problem
the thing is so but i think we should
always be exploring everything
using this kind of cost benefit analysis
integrating our best
our best values and having a broad open
public conversation and and process so
we can make those decisions because
it may be that 10 is too low maybe we
need to be
500 times smarter than than we are in
order to survive because we know our
planet is is going away i mean i think
there's
that i for me i and that this is again
my piece for the vatican
was about this in which i was why i was
so surprised they actually
published it because i said exactly the
point i'm making to you
is if we try to live by hard and fast
rules
those rules are going to be immediately
obsolete
what we have to do is say what are the
principles
that we want to guide us and what are
the structures that we'd like to build
to help make these balances in an
inclusive democratic way
and then explore carefully and
cautiously
what's working and what's not working
and there may be some areas we're seeing
like
that's incredible my feeling is if we
can get he'll extend healthy lifespan
i'd say no limits i mean let's i'd love
to have
you know my parents living you know to
their
hundreds and hundreds and twenties and
two hundreds and
and and whatever so i don't think we
need to impose
imaginary restrictions on ourselves for
futures
that we're we are we don't know yet
we just need to keep moving forward and
and keep moving forward carefully
okay so now to push this a little bit
farther one thing i've learned in
business this is an immutable truth
you are only as good as what you write
down so
you at some point the values the system
has to be translated into a document
when i think about the us we the
constitution's been pretty amazing right
you put this document down your ideals
maybe you could even call that your
value system
uh you put in sort of a formal structure
to things so there's checks and balances
i think it's
it's really quite brilliant do you have
sort of
rough swag notions that would be put
down like
all like if if we were going to go back
and write the constitution again i think
we would change
men to people right so all people are
created equal like that's a pretty rad
start
um do you have something like that in
terms of how we need to think about like
specifically what is the value set yeah
so
um two questions in terms of writing it
down there there have been
efforts to do unesco did it the council
of europe did it it's never
it's never perfect it's so far actually
hasn't even been
been that great um but it but i do think
that
the value set for for me are
one we need to have an open environment
for science
two we need to have meaning that all
information needs to be put out there
well i think we just did that we we
shouldn't be trying to
cut down the basic science to prevent
some kind of theoretical outcome in the
future i really i believe in science i
believe
in in scientific experimentation and i
know the people who are going to be
asking these questions about what are
the rules
some subset of them are going to be
people who say well let's just
shut down the science so we never have
to ask these questions so
my point number one is i really believe
in the science i believe
in the process of scientific exploration
and i think that needs to be
really important number two um is that
in terms of the process this has to be
an open
inclusive transparent process that
we can't have even very smart people
even specialists
making decisions about the future of
life that apply to everybody this is up
to
to everybody and number so should it be
voted on
well so that's a big question it's
connected to the work that i'm doing
with
um with one shared world and um
so and with the world health
organization so governance
systems aren't it's not just one thing i
mean right now we think of
how is how is is genetic engineering for
example regulated
it's not just laws it's internal review
boards in hospitals it's how
scientific publications operate and
there's a lot of different
pieces of this so yes
there are there there are laws and they
they need to be written down but
in my mind we should think also in terms
of
processes because it's not it's not
going to be any one
thing any one mechanism that fully
establishes a
governance and then third
is that we need to have regulatory
infrastructures that
in my mind the best regulated at least
for genetic engineering and
human fertilization and um is
the united kingdom uh where they do they
have a really thoughtful process
where they're actually weighing costs
and benefits of different
interventions so i think that every
country needs to have a system right now
some
do and and some don't have have anything
that balances
these kinds of international best
practices is this like the fda
of genetic alterations it it is but it's
much
the the uk system is just much more
thoughtful i mean fda is a great agency
but this is it's
much more thoughtful and there and like
for example there's a pro
a procedure called mitochondrial
transfer
um just a quick summary is the
mitochondria are the power packs of your
dna
uh the power packs of your cells i'm
sorry and if you're if you think of your
cell as like an
egg the nucleus is the
is the egg yolk and the cytoplasm is the
egg white and the mitochondria exist in
the egg white
when some women have faulty
mitochondria they pass them in varying
degrees to their children
and that can cause all kinds of things
including early death so there's a
process called mitochondrial transfer
basically swapping
egg yolks from a one with the disease
mitochondria to one with the healthy one
it's not it's
it's banned in the united states in the
uk they had a three-year national
debate then they had an open vote of
both
houses of parliament and then they
passed it to this human fertilization
embryology
authority to regulate and so everyone
who wants to
do it you have to apply first for your
clinic or your lab and then for each
application you have to
apply again for each specific
application and they have
all these experts and very thoughtful
people who are
making those decisions it's a really
smart way to do things we don't have
that and and certainly we need that
and then finally um and so and that will
allow us
to have do this kind of cost-benefit
analysis
which i think is is essential and then
the the final piece of it
is that i think it's okay for society to
define
red lines beyond which we don't think
people should go even though those may
change over time
so we had after the second world war the
nuremberg trials were to say well there
were things
like human experimentation which we
think are
so wrong that we're going to create an
international
standard saying that they're that
they're wrong
and so you know again we we have our our
access
to read write and hack the code of life
and there are all kinds of really
nefarious
things that people could do including
human experimentation including let's
just say
i mean this is a kind of a caricaturish
example but there was some country like
north korea
that said all right we can do embryo
selection some minimal genetic
engineering
to have to divide people into certain
classes
we want a certain class that's more
docile more subservient or whatever and
let's just say
hypothetically i don't think that we
would say
oh just live and let live that's north
korea
that's just north korea being north
korea i think we'd say
we want we want to have some standards
about
what is and isn't okay and that we
collectively like we do with all sorts
of issues in international law
come together to start to try to
articulate what those things are
all right you just scared the [__] out
of me so you
you've got your science fiction ability
to predict so much that you want the
audit to see what you've been right
about
walk us through what i i never
contemplated a future where a society
would want to do that but as soon as you
say it it seems almost self-evident
naive to think that they wouldn't um
what what is going to happen like where
where are we headed over the next and i
don't know what timeline you think is
most relevant
so you've got sort of near term in the
next call it 20-ish years
but then what are we talking about in
the next like 100 to 200 years what
where do we go
so so when you go and i write about this
in the book if you go to the olympics i
like
and as i've uh as i've done you you see
different forms of societal organization
competing with each other like when you
see when i went to the in the beijing
olympics i went to the volleyball
uh i think it was the bronze medal game
it was the us versus china
and when i saw the chinese team it was
just clear that everybody
had been selected based on some criteria
when they were a little kid like all the
all i don't know all the things but all
the setters were like the same body
build all the spikers were the same body
build they clearly
kind of searched around and they had a
and for the americans
we had all these different people of
different shapes and sizes and someone
had like extra
spirit and somebody tried really hard
and and
and and then we competed and somebody
won because it was two forms of just
of societal organization competing with
each other that's what's going to happen
uh even if we are as collectivist as
i've as i've articulated that's what's
going to happen
with us and so just like there was
athens
and sparta in ancient in ancient greece
let's just imagine that you're sparta
actually we can make it
make it athens because this is based in
part on plato's republic where everybody
had
a role but you could imagine a society
that had identified
that we that that believes that outliers
which is is probably true for lots of
societies that outliers
are the ones who push the envelope of of
possibility and so
for our physicists and our abstract
mathematicians
we want them to be like superstars and
our athletes we
want them to be superstars and rather
than leave everything to chance we're
going to screen every embryo
of people who have the potential to be
born um
once we make the selection of which
embryos are
are implanted we're going to have a pool
of people who have the
genetic possibility of being the
the einsteins or the usain bolts or
whatever the thing is
you could also add a um
genome editing a genetic engineering
component where
you maybe make a couple of changes to
those embryos to maybe
give them some kind of boost or prevent
some kind
what are the boosts though that you
think people are going to go for so if
the
forget the exact quote but it's
something like the science fiction
writer's job is not to imagine the car
but to imagine the traffic jam
what what are the what is it going to be
intelligence
is it going to be athletic prowess like
i think it'll depend but there's all
kinds of things that people
want there's the general things that
people want to live
longer healthier more
immune to disease people want to be
tend to want to be smarter as long as it
doesn't come with a
a high cost and my guesses people will
probably find that it it does
um and so i think i think it won't be
kind of rocket science
but then they'll be outliers and then
there'll be individuals and societies
who say well my
my life is based on being
x and you're going to have to make those
if you're talking about
genetic engineering and you're going to
have to make those decisions
those things will have to be made for
you before they're
they're born and you know people always
point to the movie
gattaca about well isn't that so
terrible that everyone's been
identified for their roles and and
certainly that's the theme of the movie
but when i saw that movie i had a
different outcome it's like god this guy
ethan hawk
he's not genetically enhanced he's she
snuck his way into the space program
with all these people who are
genetically
enhanced i if i'm in a space program
i don't want some non-enhanced person
being a liability because their
bone structure isn't able to resist the
radiation in
space i mean i just think that we may
become
super specialized and we may want or
for our survival we may even need people
to play a certain role i mean how much
of our lives
now are dependent on
innovations by people like alan turing
or john von neumann or other of these
kind of
giants who opened up possibilities that
we now
occupy like maybe society would be
better off if we had
more of those guys i mean or maybe it
would be better if we had
less of those guys and i don't think i
don't think we know but we do know
that these different systems are going
to be competing
with each other and as happens with
evolution we're going to be
constantly throwing up variation and
some of that variation is going to prove
good within the context of a particular
environment
and some isn't and over time we're going
to know
do you think we will slide towards
uniformity
or will we slide towards massive
diversity it's a great question
on one hand you can understand
uniformity because
if you ask the average person what do
you want people tend to want the same
things which is why when people go to
sperm banks
and they have a choice of what they want
you know a lot of people are picking
well i want tall i want this i want i
want that even though
like there's nothing inherently better
about being tall
than being short it's just it's rewarded
in our
in our society in ewok village they
hated the tall people
um and so on the other hand
so you could imagine all these social
pressures that every
no because no one's going to want to all
i'll invest in diversity by having a kid
who's got a greater
likelihood of dying of some terrible
genetic disorder people say well geez i
don't want that
but let somebody else be the carrier of
diversity even though
that that gene that may increase the
risk of
some you know terrible disease may also
have some benefit
that we don't even know about on the
other hand you could imagine i mean
we're a social species so if i had to
bet
i would bet on uniformity um but you
could imagine
that people say well jesus i'd like to
be blue you know i'd like to
you have whatever whatever the thing is
um you could imagine people wanting to
do it and if it was meaningful enough
maybe it could have
some kind of evolutionary impact
yeah when i think that there will be
values will come into play again and
what you're going to see is the people
who value
you know people's temperament tends to
break into certain sort of archetypes
and i think each archetype is going to
optimize for the thing that they value
whether that's creativity
whether that's intelligence you will
certainly see parents if we're talking
about germline stuff you see parents
trying to optimize for their kids not
struggling
so i want my kid to have it better than
i did so if you were
artistic but maybe you flirted with like
bipolar disease
then your your parent wouldn't want you
to struggle in that same way
so it'll be interesting to see how
that will fluctuate and i think while
we'll we'll probably oscillate towards
uniformity and then back out because
what will happen is
if everybody optimizes for intelligence
then you run into no matter how
intelligent you are
you know you're you're all sort of
you're just now competing against each
other right so
then how do you stand out you stand out
by being more creative or you know so
it'll be
really interesting i think even if
people try to game the system they'll
inherently run up against the weaknesses
of
uniformity or they'll run up against
well i wanted them to
you know be different and for there to
be diversity but there's a huge price to
pay and now my kids are struggling in a
way and so those kids end up rebelling
and they have the most
conforming children because they didn't
want them to struggle the way they did
so it feels to me like you're gonna see
you know that sort of oscillating
pattern
yeah you you'd be super easy to see yeah
but the other thing is that there could
easily be funnels i mean one of the
reasons why
humans we're more similar to each other
to all humans than say
chimpanzees are to other chimpanzees is
that our ancestors have gone through
these
very narrow funnels where almost all
homo sapiens died because of starvation
or climate change or or whatever
and a tiny number of them survived and
so the genetics
of those tiny numbers who survived
became
all of our genetics so what you're
imagining which i think makes sense is
humans living on earth or living on
earth
in this environment but you could just
as easily
imagine that there's some group of us
which i think will certainly happen
that leaves this planet and goes and
colonizes
someplace else and so that's kind of the
beginning of that funnel
and who those people are let's say it's
all the people who've given themselves
um blue blue skin there'll be an entire
species of
you know blue homo sapiens and that
that's just
going to be their reality and just
like us when we when we see those
evolutionary charts and we have
you know ramapithecus and homo erectus
and homo habilis it's like oh yeah those
those creatures which is how we see them
that used to be us
but now we're this now we're homo
sapiens
and i think these guys these homo
blueians will say oh yeah
we they'll see see those those pale
people on the chart that
used to be us and we passed through this
funnel just like our ancestors passed
through the funnel
and now this is us in this new reality
and whatever there's
those attributes they'll be that will be
them
one thing that i think that most
everyone will strive towards will be
immortality um agree with that disagree
with that and do you think that there
are any
um inherent problems with striving for
like truly living forever so i'm all for
it
i mean i if i could do it i certainly
would there's nothing
wrong with it a lot of people say well
what about overpopulation and whatever i
i think it's totally fine i just don't
think it's achievable
with the physic in the physical bodies
that we
that we have um and even if you start
living a
really long time just the law of
averages you know
gets you it's like i didn't know
penguins could get rabies or
whatever it's like that that that that a
liar will eventually get you
um but um so
you know i don't think it's achievable i
think but i think that striving for it
is
is a good idea i mean i'm pretty deeply
involved in the the science of
of human life extension and a lot of
people think oh it's like
elon musk or um
sorry to use foul language on your show
but that [__]
um adam newman um but
who who's adam newman why is he that
[__] the founder of
wework um yeah yeah did he do something
dodgy
well he had a whole thing of of wanting
to
to control the science
of of human life extension and then
and then use it to go to people with
like billion dollar companies and says i
want to buy your company and
i'll i'm going to pay you one dollar but
i'm going to give you
the secret of human life extension
um in exchange for your company actually
i heard him say this what
yeah you know it was insane it was
insane and so um
so there's a lot of crazy people but
there's a real science of human life
extension
which is really great because the the
these terrible diseases
cancer heart disease dementia that we
fear
are all correlated with aging and so if
we can
slow the process of biological aging
we can do more to fight cancer and these
other terrible diseases
i think even then we can by investing
directly
into mitigating those diseases because
if you eliminate all of cancer
we only live about three years longer
but if you can
slow the process of aging we can live
hopefully
much longer but it's it's it's a new
field of science but i think
like i i think it's great for us to to
strive for
for immortality and also i think it's
it's a
some people say and i disagree with this
that it's the finitude of
life that gives it meaning i mean
everything is
the meaning of life gives it meaning
there are all kinds of people who are
finding meaning in all in all sorts of
things and death
could be it for somebody but it doesn't
have to be so for everybody
what do you think so if nature
had a conceivable answer
which was too like there's a jellyfish
that is immortal
so we know there's nothing sort of
biologically necessary humans could have
lived for or maybe you said that you
actually think that we couldn't in our
current form so what is it in our
in our current biology that makes us
different than the jellyfish why
couldn't we live forever yeah so i'm
glad you mentioned the jellyfish in my
most recent novel eternal sonata that's
the the immortal jellyfish is actually
part of the of the theme and the science
to crack the code of immortality
so the reason why i think it's going to
be hard for um humans to
uh to live forever i mean that immortal
jellyfish it goes from kind of adult
back into polyp and adult and pulp so
by that standard we kind of do live
forever in the sense that
um you know an adult male an old female
they give their cells to each other and
then it reconstitutes as a newborn baby
who's not
50 or 60 but but uh but but zero
but why we in this exam this physical
form in my view is just
there's we can extend healthy life i
think that will definitely be
possible and we're already doing it um
but there's too many damn
parts i mean i just think that this is
when i talked about theology before
like i i love the intelligent design
people who say like oh my god you know
the body is so
complicated there's so many moving parts
and if one thing
goes wrong um then you would die there
must
only god could come up with that system
and i just think
well i don't call that intel that's [__]
design here's here's an intelligent
design
you have two parts there's the body and
there's the head
the head screws off when the body gets
old
you just screw off the head and screw it
back on another body
like that's that makes sense since to me
i just think that
right now there's so many different
systems
um that are it's like you have a car you
know like cars
don't last forever um even
well-maintained cars
there's there's always something would
it be possible
conceivably to replace each part
one at a time and that's what's
happening now with these these um
synthetic genomes a
very sim single cell organisms where
they're just
they're replacing one little piece one
little
segment of dna at a time and they kind
of keep doing it
until eventually they've replaced
the the workings of this single cell
organism with
basically the exact same code that it
had before and maybe some
some small differences but just in this
format and so
the question is could we shift to
another
format and to do that we'd have to find
a way
of downloading our consciousness and
that's where we're very very far away
we know nothing next to nothing about
how the how the brain works
but even if we were to do that which
would be i don't think we're 100 years
away
we may not even be a thousand years away
from that but let's just say
we we did it then
it would be more you than you just being
dead
um but let's say you're kind of your
consciousness gets
transferred into some kind of of
other receptacle whether it's a computer
or
a robot or or whatever like i think that
that would be you maybe at that moment
of transfer
um but then that robot is out kind of
doing its own thing
and whatever it is like it's not that
our our brain and our consciousness are
totally disassociated
from the complexity of our of our
biology so any long answer
i think we need to explore all those
issues i'm all in i say we extend life
as much as we can in in a healthy way
and strive for immortality and
and that for me writing books being on
podcasts which i hope you're preserving
this for thousands of years
um like i think it's all part of that
that very human aspiration
it's interesting because i don't have
kids um
i the sense of living forever
is i guess it could come down to like do
creating a work of art that i think is
gonna live beyond me but the just the
percentage of
of things that live more than a couple
generations is
essentially zero and so i don't take a
lot of
refuge in that and when i think about
um there almost certainly are limits to
the human body
well there are limits of the human body
obviously now and they may be truly
unovercomeable like you're saying
it makes me wonder about okay uploading
myself
into the cloud would i even be would
that experience even be recognizable if
i could forget for a second that
it would have to be simultaneously the
me that exists now dies
and the me that comes online has a sense
of continuity otherwise
you're still going through the same
problem that you were trying to avoid
which i don't want to die
so when i think about how the the
biology really does make us who we are
and something i talk a lot about
is you're having a biological experience
and
by that i mean your brain
as an organ reacts in a certain way
using neurochemistry to make you feel a
certain way
your hard wiring makes you act a certain
way so if we're
and you talk about this in hacking
darwin we're probably
roughly 50 hardwired and then 50 percent
malleable so if i know that 50 percent
of who i think of as me and this
experience that i'm trying to preserve
is hardwired and that it's this
incredibly complicated
interplay between the mushy
brain and the microbiome and
the way that you know my um vagus nerve
is
taking it's like 80 of the vagus nerve
is sending
body stimulation and communication to
the brain it's not even 50 50.
so if it's like my body is making up
this huge part of who i am and there's
all this sort of real time feedback
between the brain and the body
and that 80 percent goes away as i'm
uploaded to the cloud now of course you
could
sort of mimic it but then you start
asking questions well
do i really want to be limited to the
way that i am now or do i
going back into that like but don't i
really want to optimize a little bit
don't i want to be smarter
and so then it becomes this question of
you know what am i really
preserving and look if i could live
forever i would like that is something i
would do in a heartbeat 100
like i am far more interested in the
upside than the downside but it is like
this
really sort of tangled up question
and one of the things that i've come to
recently because i used to be really
hardcore about
i want to live forever that's it and
then just asking the the question of
why don't we live forever and
a quote that i'm haunted by is that
science progresses
funeral funeral by funeral or one
funeral at a time whatever the exact
quote is
and it just got me thinking about the
way that humans tend to like their
belief system begins to calcify and they
get stuck in their own way of thinking
and they're not able to
challenge themselves and so i didn't
know about the jellyfish that it it sort
of reverts to a polyp and then back out
that makes a lot of sense like in some
ways you have to break out of
who you are the way you think um
in order to renew and that sense of
renewal
i thought is probably one of the things
that nature has blindly
but still optimized for yeah maybe i
mean and certainly i think that
let's just say that all of a sudden you
or i
or somebody else was granted i don't
know by whom
um immortal life and you say all right
well i knew this stuff i did it for 100
years and now i'm gonna
i'm gonna reset and it doesn't mean you
kind of reset by
wiping out your brain but i just think
that we would kind of
figure out some kind of cultural way to
to
keep growing but i think that the basic
issue is that we're
like i said in the beginning we're we
are just animals
and and we have these biological
evolutionary imperatives
of just to kind of keep going without
any kind of rhyme or reason
it's just it's just kind of built in
and so um it's good news and the bad
news i mean the good news
is um that nature wants us to procreate
and creates all these
pleasures and other things that push us
to
uh to procreate but then after we're
done
it's not like that nature had any real
incentive
to kind of keep us around past
reproductive age it wasn't against it it
wasn't for it
the good news is because it wasn't
heavily selected
against it creates more malleability i
mean if there's like we are we're
heavily
um selected for needing to breathe
oxygen
uh if we if we said all right we're
gonna try to change that
in humans it's basically another species
and and we i don't think we could do it
but nature's kind of
hasn't really in any meaningful way
given a [__]
about whether we live to 40 or
80 or 100 or whatever and so
at least it creates malleability when we
look at different
examples of the animal world or some of
these long-lived animals
greenland sharks and some turtles and
other things naked mole rats
and we can say what are some of the
lessons and a lot of it is
is slowing metabolism which we can do
some people can do it with lifestyle but
then there are different drugs that
people are experimenting with called
like metformin and rapamycin
and nicotinamide and others that are
trying to kind of
trick our bodies into going into that
that low metabolism kind of screen saver
mode
yeah that stuff is interesting whether
that'll bear fruit or not is a
another question and you want to talk
about making me nervous in terms of
taking an exogenous substance and
slowing down my metabolism it's like
what are the things that we don't know
about the consequences of
that certainly i'm totally with you on
that because people
like i write about this stuff and i know
lots of the
researchers and people say like well
what are you taking and i said well i'm
not taking anything these are
i'm taking exercise and fruits and
vegetables um because these are
like systemic drugs i'm not against
taking systemic drugs
but like you said before i don't want to
be the first guy saying
like i heard on joe rogan that nmn is
it helps you live longer i'm going to
take that
but i think that you know i want to be
the 10
000th person or the 50 000th person to
take
an intervention and then by all means
let's let's do it because it's not like
it's not like just fruits and vegetables
and exercise are going to
get you that much more um but
i'm all for the scientific method and
figuring out what are the hacks
and doing them safely yeah
speaking of hacks the book darwin um
hacking darwin starts with you freezing
your sperm yes
what is your advice to people on that um
and why did you do it
so first with the advice everybody
i mean unless you already have kids and
don't want any more
um if you are going to have kids at some
point
freeze your definitely freeze your sperm
and
probably freeze your eggs um because
why the difference well just because
sperm
you know average guy i mean this will
look like a little bit of money you go
there they basically stick you in a
broom closet they give you
some dirty magazines they give you a
little plastic receptacle
it's like you know so the only it's like
it's like the plus minus
like plus it's like well that wasn't
that bad minus
it's like some money it's not a huge
amount of money
for a woman has at least in the in the
current system
you go you have to take pills or shots
you have to have
a you know semi-invasive surgical
uh procedure with some level of
anesthetic
and it's it's a it's a bigger deal than
it is
um for a guy but the reason why i think
why i did it and i think everybody
should do it
is i think that we're moving towards
this form of procreation
anyway we're removing uh we're going to
be a sexually reproducing species but
just
less so through the act of sex
and if you're going for going to do it
anyway why not freeze your eggs or sperm
when you are young as young and healthy
as
as possible and even if you do it and
it's wrong and you don't
need it well then just throw it away i
mean
so it seems like the the the upside is
potentially huge
and there's the downside is relatively
small it's a bigger downside for women
than
than for men so i tell everybody to do
it and
in the book you talk about doing it as
young as you can why
why does that matter just so that at a
certain age
uh it's not necessarily always as
absolutely young as as you can but there
are kind of
peak ages for men and for women
i don't remember it exactly but my guess
is men is around 20 and women is around
around 25 and it's just that our
our bodies start to take on mutations
with age through exposures and um
some of those mutations are passed on to
offspring
through our eggs and our and our sperm
so it's just
you if you're going to freeze you may as
well do it when you're at your
reproductive peak
that makes sense jamie i think that is
the perfect place to
tap out as people now they have a
mission they need to
run out and get this stuff frozen yeah
dude thank you so much man i i just
could not have been more into your book
i'm super excited to see what else you
do both on the fiction and the
non-fiction side so
my man thank you and where can people
find you where can they pick up the book
yeah that's great so
they can find me at my website jamie
madsel.com
uh you can also go to the
hackingdarwin.com site to learn more
about the book and you can pick up the
book there and given that most of us are
living virtual life you can go to your
local bookstore
wear a mask and then if you want to
learn more about one shared world you
can go to
oneshared.world awesome
all right guys if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be
legendary take care
it makes me want to live life to the
full and to encourage other people to do
the same
the only life we've got so let's live it
to the full and let's
leave the world a better place than we
found it